.Dd July 5, 2026
.Dt dsetuf 7
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm dsetuf
.Nd disjoint-set (union-find) module
.Sh LIBRARY
IRIS C Library
.Pq Vt ilib_c
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
module implements a disjoint-set (also called union-find) data structure over
.Fa set_size_t
integer elements in the range [0, size). Each element begins in its own
singleton set; sets can be merged with
.Fn dset_join ,
and the representative
.Pq root
of the set containing an element can be queried with
.Fn dset_find .
.Pp
Internally, each set is represented as a tree encoded in the
.Fa parent
array, where
.Fa parent[x] == x
identifies
.Fa x
as a root. Two optimizations keep operations fast:
.Bl -bullet
.It
.Em Path compression :
every call to
.Fn dset_find
rewrites the parent pointers of all nodes visited so they point
directly at the root, flattening the tree for future lookups.
.It
.Em Union by size :
.Fn dset_join
always attaches the smaller tree's root under the larger tree's root,
using the
.Fa size
array to track tree sizes, which bounds tree height logarithmically.
.El
.Pp
Together these give amortized near-constant time per operation.
.Pp
The
.Vt disjoint_set_t
structure is defined as:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
typedef struct {
	set_size_t  set_count;
	set_size_t *size;
	int        *parent;
} disjoint_set_t;
.Ed
.Pp
.Vt set_size_t
is an alias for
.Vt unsigned int .
.Pp
Both
.Va size
and
.Va parent
are dynamically allocated arrays, using the allocator specified by
.Sy DSUF_MALLOC ;
see
.Sx "IMPLEMENTATION MACROS" .
.Pp
The following functions make up the module's API:
.Bl -tag -width "dset_cardinality()"
.It Fn dset_construct
initialize a
.Vt disjoint_set_t
of a given size.
.It Fn dset_destroy
free all memory owned by a
.Vt disjoint_set_t .
.It Fn dset_find
return the root of the set containing an element.
.It Fn dset_join
merge the sets containing two elements.
.It Fn dset_joined
test whether two elements belong to the same set.
.It Fn dset_cardinality
return the number of elements in an element's set.
.El
.Sh IMPLEMENTATION MACROS
The following preprocessor macros control code generation and are
checked at include time:
.Bl -tag
.It Sy DSUF_IMPLEMENTATION
Must be defined in exactly one translation unit before including
.In dsetuf.h
to emit function bodies. All other translation units should include
the header without defining it, receiving declarations only.
.It Sy DSUF_DECL
Overrides the storage/linkage specifier applied to every function.
Defaults to
.Li static inline
if left undefined.
.It Sy DSUF_MALLOC , Sy DSUF_FREE
Override the allocator used by
.Fn dset_construct
and
.Fn dset_destroy .
Both must be defined together, or neither; defining only one is a
compile-time error. If neither is defined, both default to the
standard library's
.Fn malloc
and
.Fn free .
.El
.Sh STANDARDS
.Bl -tag -width Ds -compact
.It Fn dset_construct
.It Fn dset_destroy
.It Fn dset_find
.It Fn dset_join
.It Fn dset_joined
.It Fn dset_cardinality
.El
.D1 St -isoC-99
.Sh NOTES
No bounds checking is performed on the element index
.Fa x
passed to
.Fn dset_find ,
.Fn dset_join ,
.Fn dset_joined ,
or
.Fn dset_cardinality .
Passing a value outside [0, size) is undefined behavior.
.Pp
.Fn dset_find
is implemented recursively. Path compression keeps subsequent calls
shallow, but the first call on a long, uncompressed chain recurses to a
depth proportional to the chain length.
.Pp
.Nm
is not thread-safe; concurrent calls that mutate the same
.Vt disjoint_set_t
from multiple threads (including concurrent
.Fn dset_find
calls, since path compression writes to
.Fa parent )
are a data race.
.Pp
.Fn dset_joined
and
.Fn dset_cardinality
take a
.Fa const disjoint_set_t *
but internally discard the
.Sy const
qualifier to call
.Fn dset_find ,
since path compression mutates
.Fa parent
even though the operation is logically a read. This is intentional
.Pq logical constness ,
not an oversight.
.Sh EXAMPLES
The following program builds a minimum spanning tree over a small
weighted graph using Kruskal's algorithm, using
.Nm
to detect and reject edges that would form a cycle.
.Bl -tag -width -5n -offset -6n
.It Sy Kruskal program
.El
.Bl -tag -width 0
.El
.Bd -literal
#define DSUF_IMPLEMENTATION
#include "dsetuf.h"

#include <stdio.h>
#include <stdlib.h>

typedef struct {
	int u, v, weight;
} edge_t;

int cmp_edge(const void *a, const void *b)
{
	return ((const edge_t *)a)->weight
	     - ((const edge_t *)b)->weight;
}

int main(void)
{
	edge_t edges[] = {
		{0, 1, 4}, {0, 2, 1}, {1, 2, 2},
		{1, 3, 5}, {2, 3, 8},
	};
	int n_edges = sizeof(edges) / sizeof(edges[0]);
	int n_vertices = 4;

	qsort(edges, n_edges, sizeof(edge_t), cmp_edge);

	disjoint_set_t ds;
	dset_construct(&ds, n_vertices);

	int total_weight = 0;

	for (int i = 0; i < n_edges; ++i) {
		edge_t e = edges[i];

		if (dset_joined(&ds, e.u, e.v))
			continue; /* would form a cycle */

		dset_join(&ds, e.u, e.v);
		total_weight += e.weight;
		printf("added edge %d-%d (weight %d)\\n",
		       e.u, e.v, e.weight);
	}

	printf("total MST weight: %d\\n", total_weight);

	dset_destroy(&ds);
	return 0;
}
.Ed
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr dset_construct 3 ,
.Xr dset_destroy 3 ,
.Xr dset_find 3 ,
.Xr dset_join 3 ,
.Xr dset_joined 3 ,
.Xr dset_cardinality 3 ,
.Xr graph_kruskal 3
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Gabriel Guillermo Saavedra Moreira