.Dd 2026-07-10
.Dt rbtree 7
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm rbtree
.Nd intrusive red-black tree module
.Sh LIBRARY
IRIS C Library
.Pq Vt ilib_c
.Sh DESCRIPTION
Intrusive balanced binary search tree implementing a
.Sy red-black
tree, derived from Bayer's symmetric binary B-trees and later
formalized by Guibas and Sedgewick.
Maintains
.Sy O(log n)
search, insertion, and deletion by preserving a bounded black-height
across all root-to-leaf paths, using recoloring and rotations to
restore balance after mutation.
.Pp
Nodes are
.Sy intrusive :
each object embeds an
.Vt rb_node_t
member, and the tree never allocates or frees the objects it stores.
Recover the containing object from a node pointer with
.Fn RB_CONTAINER .
.Pp
The tree maintains the following invariants:
.Bl -bullet
.It
Every node is colored either red or black.
.It
The root is always black.
.It
All leaves (represented by the sentinel
.Va rb_nil )
are black.
.It
A red node never has a red child
.Pq no two consecutive red nodes on any path .
.It
Every path from a given node to any descendant leaf contains the
same number of black nodes
.Pq the node's black-height .
.El
.Pp
These invariants bound the height of the tree to
.Sy 2*log2(n+1) ,
which guarantees worst-case logarithmic time for all operations.
.Pp
A single shared sentinel node,
.Va rb_nil ,
represents all leaves and the parent of the root.
Callers must not dereference
.Va rb_nil
as if it were a live object; it exists purely to eliminate
null-pointer special cases in the insertion and deletion logic.
.Pp
Insertion performs at most
.Sy 2
rotations to restore balance; deletion performs at most
.Sy 3 .
Recoloring may propagate toward the root but does not itself cost
more than
.Sy O(log n)
per operation.
.Pp
The tree is generic over key type through two caller-supplied
comparators:
.Bd -literal -offset 4n
typedef int (*rb_cmp_t)(const rb_node_t *a, const rb_node_t *b);
typedef int (*rb_key_cmp_t)(const void *key, const rb_node_t *n);
.Ed
.Pp
Both comparators must impose a total order consistent with
.Xr qsort 3
semantics
.Pq negative, zero, or positive for less-than, equal, and greater-than .
Splitting the two roles allows
.Fn rb_search
to accept a raw key
.Pq e.g. an integer or string
without requiring the caller to construct a dummy node just to
compare against one.
.Ss Node structure
.Bd -literal
typedef struct rb_node rb_node_t;

struct rb_node {
	rb_node_t *parent;
	rb_node_t *left;
	rb_node_t *right;

	rb_color_t color;
};
.Ed
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width "parent" -compact
.It Va parent
Pointer to the parent node.
The root's parent is
.Va rb_nil .
.It Va left
Pointer to the left child.
Leaf children point to
.Va rb_nil .
.It Va right
Pointer to the right child.
Leaf children point to
.Va rb_nil .
.It Va color
Node color, either
.Dv RB_RED
or
.Dv RB_BLACK .
.El
.Pp
Callers embed
.Vt rb_node_t
inside their own structure and use
.Fn RB_CONTAINER
to recover the enclosing object from a node pointer.
.Ss Tree structure
.Bd -literal
typedef struct {
	rb_node_t    *root;
	rb_cmp_t      cmp;
	rb_key_cmp_t  kcmp;
} rb_tree_t;
.Ed
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width "kcmp" -compact
.It Va root
Pointer to the root node, or
.Va rb_nil
if the tree is empty.
.It Va cmp
Node-to-node comparator, used during insertion.
.It Va kcmp
Key-to-node comparator, used by
.Fn rb_search .
.El
.Ss Feature and Implementation Macros
The header exposes three preprocessor hooks that control linkage and
compilation.
.Bl -tag
.It Sy RBTREE_DECL
Controls the linkage of all declared functions.
If left undefined, it expands to
.Sy static inline ,
matching the single-header, header-only default.
Define it before including the header to override the linkage
.Pq e.g. to Sy extern for a multi-translation-unit build .
.It Fn RB_CONTAINER ptr type member
Recovers a pointer to the enclosing object given a pointer to its
embedded
.Vt rb_node_t
member.
Computed as
.Pp
.Bd -literal -offset 4n
((type *)((char *)(ptr) - ILIB_OFFSETOF(type, member)))
.Ed
.Pp
.Fa ptr
must point to a live
.Vt rb_node_t
embedded in an object of
.Fa type ;
.Fa member
is the name of that embedded field.
Passing
.Va rb_nil
or a dangling pointer is undefined behavior.
.It Sy RBTREE_IMPLEMENTATION
Include guard for the implementation.
Function bodies are compiled only in translation units that define
.Sy RBTREE_IMPLEMENTATION
before including the header.
The implementation block is internally guarded against
double-inclusion within the same translation unit.
.El
.Ss The Application Programing Interface
.Bl -tag
.It Fn rb_init "rb_tree_t *t" "rb_cmp_t cmp" "rb_key_cmp_t kcmp"
Initializes
.Fa t
as an empty tree, storing
.Fa cmp
and
.Fa kcmp
for later use by
.Fn rb_insert
and
.Fn rb_search ,
respectively.
Must be called before any other operation on
.Fa t .
.It Fn rb_insert "rb_tree_t *t" "rb_node_t *node"
Inserts
.Fa node
into
.Fa t ,
using
.Fa cmp
to locate its position, then restores the red-black invariants via
recoloring and rotation.
.It Fn rb_delete "rb_tree_t *t" "rb_node_t *node"
Removes
.Fa node
from
.Fa t
and restores the red-black invariants.
.Fa node
must already be present in
.Fa t .
.It Fn rb_search "const rb_tree_t *t" "const void *key"
Searches
.Fa t
for a node matching
.Fa key ,
using
.Fa kcmp
for comparison.
Invalid arguments
.Pq a Dv NULL Fa t No or Fa key
are rejected without dereferencing either pointer.
A search that reaches a leaf without matching
.Fa key
terminates without dereferencing the sentinel.
.It Fn rb_minimum "rb_node_t *t"
Walks left from
.Fa t
to locate the node with the smallest key in the subtree rooted at
.Fa t .
.It Fn rb_maximum "rb_node_t *t"
Walks right from
.Fa t
to locate the node with the largest key in the subtree rooted at
.Fa t .
.It Fn rb_successor "rb_node_t *t"
Locates the in-order successor of
.Fa t
within the tree.
If
.Fa t
has a right subtree, the successor is the minimum of that subtree;
otherwise the search walks up through ancestors until it finds one
reached from its left child.
.It Fn rb_predecessor "rb_node_t *t"
Locates the in-order predecessor of
.Fa t
within the tree.
If
.Fa t
has a left subtree, the predecessor is the maximum of that subtree;
otherwise the search walks up through ancestors until it finds one
reached from its right child.
.El
.Sh STANDARDS
.Bl -tag -width Ds -compact
.It Fn rb_init
.It Fn rb_insert
.It Fn rb_delete
.It Fn rb_search
.It Fn rb_minimum
.It Fn rb_maximum
.It Fn rb_successor
.It Fn rb_predecessor
.El
.D1 St -isoC-99
.Sh NOTES
The tree does not track its own cardinality.
Callers that need a count are expected to maintain one alongside
their own management of object lifetime.
.Pp
.Fn rb_search
does not distinguish an invalid call
.Pq Dv NULL Fa t No or Fa key
from a valid search that finds nothing; both are reported the same
way.
(See
.Xr rb_search 3
for the exact values used to signal each case.)
.Pp
.Fn rb_minimum ,
.Fn rb_maximum ,
.Fn rb_successor ,
and
.Fn rb_predecessor
take a
.Vt rb_node_t
pointer rather than a
.Vt rb_tree_t
pointer, and operate relative to the given node rather than the
tree as a whole.
All four reject
.Dv NULL
and
.Va rb_nil
as arguments without walking the tree.
.Fn rb_successor
and
.Fn rb_predecessor
also signal the boundary case where no further node exists
.Pq e.g. Fn rb_successor No on the maximum node
the same way they signal an invalid argument; consult
.Xr rb_successor 3
and
.Xr rb_predecessor 3
for the exact values used.
.Pp
.Fn RB_CONTAINER
performs no type checking.
Passing a
.Fa ptr
that does not point to an
.Vt rb_node_t
embedded in
.Fa type
is undefined behavior.
.Pp
None of the functions in this API are thread-safe.
Concurrent access to the same
.Vt rb_tree_t
from multiple threads, where at least one access is a mutation,
requires external synchronization.
.Sh EXAMPLES
.Pp
The following program builds a small red-black tree of integer-keyed
items, using
.Nm
to insert, search, and walk the tree in sorted order via repeated
calls to
.Fn rb_successor .
.Bl -tag -width -5n -offset -6n
.It Sy Example Red-Black Tree program
.El
.Bl -tag -width 0
.El
.Bd -literal
#include <stdio.h>

#define RBTREE_IMPLEMENTATION
#include "rbtree.h"

typedef struct {
	int        key;
	rb_node_t  node;
} item_t;

static int item_cmp(const rb_node_t *a, const rb_node_t *b)
{
	item_t *ia = RB_CONTAINER(a, item_t, node);
	item_t *ib = RB_CONTAINER(b, item_t, node);

	return ia->key - ib->key;
}

static int item_key_cmp(const void *key, const rb_node_t *n)
{
	int    k = *(const int *)key;
	item_t *i = RB_CONTAINER(n, item_t, node);

	return k - i->key;
}

int main(int argc, char **argv)
{
	rb_tree_t t;
	item_t    items[5] = {
		{ .key = 40 }, { .key = 10 }, { .key = 30 },
		{ .key = 20 }, { .key = 50 },
	};

	rb_init(&t, item_cmp, item_key_cmp);

	for (int i = 0; i < 5; i++)
		rb_insert(&t, &items[i].node);

	int         want = 30;
	rb_node_t  *found = rb_search(&t, &want);

	if (found != NULL)
		printf("found key %d\n",
        		RB_CONTAINER(found, item_t, node)->key);

	rb_node_t *n = rb_minimum(t.root);

	printf("in-order: ");
	while (n != NULL) {
		printf("%d ", RB_CONTAINER(n, item_t, node)->key);
		n = rb_successor(n);
	}
	printf("\n");

	return 0;
}
.Ed
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr rb_init 3 ,
.Xr rb_insert 3 ,
.Xr rb_delete 3 ,
.Xr rb_search 3 ,
.Xr rb_minimum 3 ,
.Xr rb_maximum 3 ,
.Xr rb_successor 3 ,
.Xr rb_predecessor 3 ,
.Xr qsort 3
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Gabriel Guillermo Saavedra Moreira